# **130.3** Hymenolepiasis

*Karen A. Alroy, Robert H. Gilman*

### **INTRODUCTION**

Humans are infected mainly by two species of tapeworms of the genus *Hymenolepis:*

- • *H. nana:* dwarf tapeworm (1–5 cm long), the most common tapeworm infection of humans
- • *H. diminuta:* considerably larger (20–90 cm long), a rodent tapeworm that rarely infects humans[.1](#page-0-0)

#### **EPIDEMIOLOGY**

*H. nana* has a worldwide distribution with between 50 and 75 million carriers. It is the most common tapeworm infection in humans, particularly in children.[2](#page-0-1) There is a high prevalence in Central America. *H. nana* infection is observed in households with poor hygiene and overcrowding, and in children the prevalence can be as high as 5% to 25%.[3,4](#page-0-2)

*H. diminuta* also has a cosmopolitan distribution with prevalence up to 1% in parts of India. Children are most likely to contract infection after contact/play with stored grain or cereals.

# **NATURAL HISTORY, PATHOGENESIS, AND PATHOLOGY**

Humans are the natural definitive host for *H. nana,* which has a direct life cycle (no intermediate host is needed). Rodents can serve as a definitive host of *H. nana,* and beetles or fleas can serve as intermediate hosts, although neither are necessary for transmission to humans.[5](#page-0-3) Other *Hymenolepis* species utilize insect intermediate hosts. After ingestion of eggs, the cysticercoid develops in the intestinal villi. In several days, it emerges and in 3 to 4 weeks develops into a tapeworm. Infective eggs containing a hexacanth embryo or oncosphere are released to the intestine after disintegration of the proglottid[.6](#page-0-4) Eggs passed in feces are immediately infective and remain viable for 2 weeks[.2](#page-0-1) Autoinfection within the gut can occur.

Accidental ingestion of cysticercoid-infected beetles, fleas, or other insects in various grain products can rarely cause human infection with *H. diminuta.*[7](#page-0-5)

### **CLINICAL FEATURES**

Large burdens of *H. nana* tapeworms (>300) in children can cause abdominal discomfort, irritability, diarrhea, and possibly malabsorption. Clinical signs in adults are rare; only in heavy infection have diarrhea and abdominal discomfort been noted. Diarrhea results from damage to the mucosal surface.[8](#page-0-6)

The prepatent period of *H. diminuta* in humans is about 3 weeks, and infection is mild. Diarrhea, nausea, and anorexia have occurred, but symptoms are rare.

# **PATIENT EVALUATION, DIAGNOSIS, AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS**

Diagnosis is made by the identification of ova in stool samples. Egg counts in stool of over 10,000 eggs per gram are considered heavy infections.

#### **TREATMENT**

Praziquantel (25 mg/kg in adults and children), niclosamide (>90% efficacy), and nitazoxanide (75%–93% efficacy) are effective. A carrier's family/household members should also be treated. Treatment is successful if eggs are not observed in stool samples 1 month post-treatment.[9](#page-0-7) Prevention includes improved environmental and personal hygiene.

#### REFERENCES

- <span id="page-0-0"></span>1. Neafie RC, Marty AM. Unusual infections in humans. Clin Microbiol Rev 1993;6:34–56.
- <span id="page-0-1"></span>2. Thompson RA. Neglected zoonotic helminths: *Hymenolepis nana*, *Echinococcus canadensis* and *Ancylostoma ceylanicum*. Clin Microbiol Infect 2015;21(5):426–32.
- <span id="page-0-2"></span>3. Andreassen J. Intestinal tapeworms. In: Cox FEG, Kreier JP, Wakelin D, editors. Topley and Wilson's microbiology and microbial infection, vol. 5. 9th ed. London: Arnold; 1998. p. 521–37.
- 4. Martínez-Barbabosa I, Gutiérrez-Cárdenas EM, Gaona E, Shea M. The prevalence of *Hymenolepis nana* in schoolchildren in a bicultural community. Rev Biomed 2010;21:21–7.
- <span id="page-0-3"></span>5. Thompson RCA, McManus DP. Aetiology: parasites and life cycles. In: Eckert J, Thompson RC, Bucklar H, et al, editors. Manual on echinococcosis in humans and animals: a public health problem of global concern. Geneva: World Organization for Animal Health; 2001. p. 1–19.
- <span id="page-0-4"></span>6. Schantz PM. Tapeworms (cestodiasis). Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1996;25:637–53.
- <span id="page-0-5"></span>7. Raether W, Hanel H. Epidemiology, clinical manifestations and diagnosis of zoonotic cestode infections: an update. Parasitol Res 2003;91:412–38.
- <span id="page-0-6"></span>8. Despommier DD, Gwadz RW, Hotez PJ. Parasitic diseases. 3rd ed. New York. Berlin: Springer; 1994.
- <span id="page-0-7"></span>9. Mehlhorn H. Encyclopedic reference of parasitology, vol. 1: Biologystructure-function; vol. 2: Diseases-treatment-therapy. 2nd ed. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer; 2001.