- 17. Liu Q, He B, Huang SY, et al. Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome, an emerging tick-borne zoonosis. Lancet Infect Dis 2014;14(8):763–72.
- 18. Lee MJ, Kim KH, Yi J, et al. In vitro antiviral activity of ribavirin against severe fever with thrombocytopenia virus. Korean J Intern Med 2017;32:731–3.
- 19. Liu W, Lu QB, Cui N, et al. Case-fatality ratio and effectiveness of ribavirin therapy among hospitalized patients with severe fever with thrombocytopneia syndrome. Clin Infect Dis 2013;57:1292–9.
- 20. Oh WS, Yoo JR, Kwon KT, et al. Effect of early plasma exchange on survival in patients with severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome: a multicenter study. Yonsei Med J 2017;58(4):867–71.
- 21. Park I, Kim HI, Kwon KT. Two treatment cases of severe fever and thrombocytopenia syndrome with oral ribavirin and plasma exchange. Infect Chemother 2017;49(1):72–7.
- 22. Ryu BH, Kim JY, Kim T, et al. Extensive severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus contamination in surrounding environment in patient rooms. Clin Microbiol Infect 2018;24(8):911.
- 23. McMullan LK, Folk SM, Kelly AJ, et al. A new phlebovirus associated with severe febrile illness in Missouri. N Engl J Med 2012;367(9):834–41.
- 24. Savage HM, Godsey MS Jr, Lambert A, et al. First detection of Heartland virus (Bunyaviridae: phlebovirus) from field collected arthropods. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2013;89(3):445–52.
- 25. Godsey MS Jr, Savage HM, Burkhalter KL, et al. Transmission of Heartland virus (Bunyaviridae: phlebovirus) by experimentally infected Amblyomma americanum (Acari: Ixodidae). J Med Entomol 2016.
- 26. Savage HM, Godsey MS Jr, Panella NA, et al. Surveillance for Heartland virus (Bunyaviridae: phlebovirus) in Missouri during 2013: first detection of virus in adults of Amblyomma americanum (Acari: Ixodidae). J Med Entomol 2016;53(3):607–12.
- 27. Bosco-Lauth AM, Panella NA, Root JJ, et al. Serological investigation of Heartland virus (Bunyaviridae: phlebovirus) exposure in wild and domestic animals adjacent to human case sites in Missouri 2012-2013. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2015;92(6):1163–7.
- 28. Riemersma KK, Komar N. Heartland virus neutralizing antibodies in vertebrate wildlife, United States, 2009-2014. Emerg Infect Dis 2015;21(10):1830–3.
- 29. Fill MA, Compton ML, McDonald EC, et al. Novel clinical and pathologic findings in a Heartland virus-associated death. Clin Infect Dis 2017;64(4):510–12.
- 30. Muehlenbachs A, Fata CR, Lambert AJ, et al. Heartland virus-associated death in Tennessee. Clin Infect Dis 2014;59(6):845–50.

- 31. Pastula DM, Turabelidze G, Yates KF, et al. Notes from the field: Heartland virus disease - United States, 2012-2013. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2014;63(12):270–1.
- 32. Alkan C, Bichaud L, de Lamballerie X, et al. Sandfly-borne phleboviruses of Eurasia and Africa: epidemiology, genetic diversity, geographic range, control measures. Antiviral Res 2013;100(1):54–74.
- 33. Ergunay K, Ayhan N, Charrel RN. Novel and emergent sandfly-borne phleboviruses in Asia Minor: a systematic review. Rev Med Virol 2017;27(2).
- 34. Charrel RN, Bichaud L, de Lamballerie X. Emergence of Toscana virus in the Mediterranean area. World J Virol 2012;1(5):135–41.
- 35. Varani S, Gelsomino F, Bartoletti M, et al. Meningitis caused by Toscana virus is associated with strong antiviral response in the CNS and altered frequency of blood antigen-presenting cells. Viruses 2015;7(11):5831–43.
- 36. Downs JW, Flood DT, Orr NH, et al. Sandfly fever in Afghanistan a sometimes overlooked disease of military importance: a case series and review of the literature. US Army Med Dep J 2017;(3–17):60–6.
- 37. Dupouey J, Bichaud L, Ninove L, et al. Toscana virus infections: a case series from France. J Infect 2014;68(3):290–5.
- 38. Ergunay K, Sayiner AA, Litzba N, et al. Multicentre evaluation of central nervous system infections due to flavi and phleboviruses in Turkey. J Infect 2012;65(4):343–9.
- 39. De Lamballerie X, Tolou H, Durand JP, et al. Prevalence of Toscana virus antibodies in volunteer blood donors and patients with central nervous system infections in southeastern France. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis 2007;7(2):275–7.
- 40. Bichaud L, Izri A, de Lamballerie X, et al. First detection of Toscana virus in Corsica, France. Clin Microbiol Infect 2014;20(2):O101–4.
- 41. Alkan C, Allal-Ikhlef AB, Alwassouf S, et al. Virus isolation, genetic characterization and seroprevalence of Toscana virus in Algeria. Clin Microbiol Infect 2015;21(11):1040.e1–9.
- 42. Ergunay K, Ismayilova V, Colpak IA, et al. A case of central nervous system infection due to a novel sandfly fever virus (SFV) variant: sandfly fever Turkey virus (SFTV). J Clin Virol 2012;54(1):79–82.
- 43. Kocak Tufan Z, Weidmann M, Bulut C, et al. Clinical and laboratory findings of a sandfly fever Turkey virus outbreak in Ankara. J Infect 2011;63(5):375–81.
- 44. Perez-Ruiz M, Collao X, Navarro-Marí JM, et al. Reverse transcription, real-time PCR assay for detection of Toscana virus. J Clin Virol 2007;39(4):276–81.
- 45. Weidmann M, Sanchez-Seco MP, Sall AA, et al. Rapid detection of important human pathogenic phleboviruses. J Clin Virol 2008;41(2):138–42.

# **36.9** Sindbis Fever

*Gregory Deye, Michael Koren*

# KEY FEATURES

- • Self-limited febrile illness with rash and polyarthropathy.
- • Arthritis may persist for longer than 12 months.
- • Broad geographic range.

#### **INTRODUCTION**

Sindbis virus (SINV) is an alphavirus within the Western equine encephalitis virus complex. Like other alphaviruses, it has a singlestranded, positive-sense genome contained within a small, enveloped virion. The virus was first isolated in 1952 from *Culex univittatus* mosquitoes trapped in the Sindbis district of Egypt.[1](#page-1-0) It was first isolated from human whole blood from a febrile patient in Uganda in 1961[.2](#page-1-1) The first major recognized outbreak occurred in South Africa in 1974 causing hundreds of cases. During the 1980s a disease characterized by rash and arthritis was described in Sweden, Russia, and Finland and named *Ockelbo disease, Karelian fever*, and *Pogosta disease,* respectively. Subsequent analysis has shown all of these clinical syndromes to be caused by SINV.[3](#page-1-2) Six genotypes have been described spread across four continents[.2](#page-1-1)

#### **EPIDEMIOLOGY**

The virus is transmitted primarily from *Culex* species of mosquitoes to multiple avian species, which serve as amplifying hosts and perpetuate the cycle of transmission. However, *Aedes cinereus* and *A. communis* are capable carriers and may function as bridging vectors from infected birds to humans.[4](#page-1-3)

Outbreaks of clinical cases due to SINV infection have primarily been reported from South Africa and Scandinavia. However, reports of seropositive individuals have been reported from Australia, several countries in South and Southeast Asia, the Middle East, Central Europe, and several other countries across multiple geographic regions of Africa[.2](#page-1-1)

In South Africa and Finland, disease incidence tends to be clustered in discrete outbreaks occurring on a background of sporadic endemic cases[.5,6](#page-1-4) The seasonality of cases mirrors changes in local *Culex* mosquito populations. Overall incidence has been noted to be steadily rising in Finland from 0.4 cases per 100,000 in 1982 to 1987 to 2.0 cases per 100,000 in 2010 to 2012[.2](#page-1-1)

Seroprevalence rates vary significantly between various endemic regions, with some of the highest rates reported in areas of Finland (17%)[7](#page-1-5) and South Africa (18%)[.6](#page-1-6)

Sindbis fever outbreaks have notably been reported in conjunction with outbreaks of West Nile virus infection as they share the same *Culex* mosquito vectors[.8](#page-1-7)

# **CLINICAL FEATURES**

The majority of infections result in asymptomatic or sub-clinical infection, with only approximately 6% of cases manifesting clinical symptoms.[5](#page-1-4)

The incubation period is estimated to be 8 to 9 days.[9](#page-1-8) The most common symptoms reported by patients are rash and arthralgia, both of which occur in more than 90% of cases. The rash typically appears on the trunk and limbs first, as macules and progressing to papules, with all lesions usually in the same stage of development.[2](#page-1-1) Distribution may include all four extremities, including palms and soles; the face is usually spared. The rash may persist for more than 5 days.

Arthropathy is often symmetric and may occur with or without effusion. The joints most commonly involved include ankles, knees, fingers, and wrists, with less frequent involvement of hips, shoulders, neck, and back.[9](#page-1-8)

Other symptoms often reported include fever, fatigue, myalgias, and headache, which are reported in approximately half of symptomatic cases.

Joint symptoms can persist 3 years or longer, and may cause a significant degree of disability[.10](#page-1-9) The presence of the HLADRB1\*01 allele has been significantly associated with the manifestation of clinical disease and with a higher rate of chronic joint pain[.11](#page-1-10)

## **PATIENT EVALUATION, DIAGNOSIS, AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS**

Differential diagnosis should include consideration of chikungunya or Ross River virus infection based on geographic location. Other important considerations include parvovirus B19, varicella, or measles, along with non-infectious rheumatic conditions.

Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) usually is ineffective for diagnosis because viremia is low level and transient[.2](#page-1-1) Diagnosis is typically based on serologic confirmation[.3](#page-1-2)

Elevation of specific IgM is typically detectable within 1 week of symptom onset and persists for up to 6 months. IgG is generally elevated 8 to 9 days after symptom onset and is persistent.[9](#page-1-8)

### **TREATMENT**

There are no specific therapies. Symptomatic therapy with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and rest may provide some relief, although effectiveness may vary in individuals. Preventive measures include avoidance of the bites of *Culex* mosquitoes.

#### REFERENCES

- <span id="page-1-0"></span>1. Taylor R, Hurlbut H, Work T, et al. Sindbis virus: a newly recognized arthropod transmitted virus. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1955;4(5):844–62.
- <span id="page-1-1"></span>2. Adouchief S, Smura T, Sane J, et al. Sindbis virus as a human pathogen—epidemiology, clinical picture and pathogenesis. Rev Med Virol 2016;26(4):221–41.
- <span id="page-1-2"></span>3. Manni T, Kurkela S, Vaheri A, Vapalahti O. Diagnostics of Pogosta disease: antigenic properties and evaluation of Sindbis virus IgM and IgG enzyme immunoassays. Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis 2008;8(3):303–12.
- <span id="page-1-3"></span>4. Turell MJ, LundstrÖM JO, Niklasson B. Transmission of Ockelbo virus by Aedes cinereus, Ae. communis, and Ae. excrucians (Diptera: Culicidae) collected in an enzootic area in central Sweden. J Med Entomol 1990;27(3):266–8.
- <span id="page-1-4"></span>5. Brummer-Korvenkontio M, Vapalahti O, Kuusisto P, et al. Epidemiology of Sindbis virus infections in Finland 1981–96: possible factors explaining a peculiar disease pattern. Epidemiol Infect 2002;129(02):335–45.
- <span id="page-1-6"></span>6. Storm N, Weyer J, Markotter W, et al. Human cases of Sindbis fever in South Africa, 2006-2010. Epidemiol Infect 2014;142(2):234.
- <span id="page-1-5"></span>7. Laine M, Vainionpää R, Oksi J, et al. The prevalence of antibodies against Sindbis-related (Pogosta) virus in different parts of Finland. Rheumatology 2003;42(5):632–6.
- <span id="page-1-7"></span>8. McIntosh B, Jupp P, Dos Santos I, Meenehan G. Epidemics of West Nile and Sindbis viruses in South Africa with Culex (Culex) univittatus theobald as vector. S Afr J Sci 1976;72(10):295–300.
- <span id="page-1-8"></span>9. Kurkela S, Manni T, Myllynen J, et al. Clinical and laboratory manifestations of Sindbis virus infection: prospective study, Finland, 2002–2003. J Infect Dis 2005;191(11):1820–9.
- <span id="page-1-9"></span>10. Kurkela S, Helve T, Vaheri A, Vapalahti O. Arthritis and arthralgia three years after Sindbis virus infection: clinical follow-up of a cohort of 49 patients. Scand J Infect Dis 2008;40(2):167–73.
- <span id="page-1-10"></span>11. Sane J, Kurkela S, Lokki M-L, et al. Clinical Sindbis alphavirus infection is associated with HLA-DRB1\* 01 allele and production of autoantibodies. Clin Infect Dis 2012;55(3):358–63.