# **148** Arthropod Vector Control

*Daniel Strickman*

# KEY FEATURES

- • Diseases caused by arthropod-transmitted pathogens vary widely and may require different control approaches.
- • Vector control can reduce pathogen transmission from arthropods.
- • Vector control generally is divided into personal protection and community-level protection approaches.
- • Many new vector-control tools are being developed, including both biologically and chemically based methods.
- • The effectiveness of new vector-control tools requires leadership, investment, and application from the World Health Organization and other globally focused entities.

# **INTRODUCTION**

Arthropods have been transmitting pathogens for a long time. One of the most evocative examples is a fossil avian malaria *Plasmodium* visible in the gut and salivary glands of a *Culex* mosquito preserved in Dominican amber 15 to 45 million years ago[.1](#page-2-0) No doubt other mites, ticks, lice, bugs, and biting flies have been associated with vertebrate pathogens, stretching back to their origins for over 200 million years. Currently, arthropod-borne pathogens take a heavy toll on humans and domestic animals; an estimated 17% of all human infectious disease is in this category.[2](#page-2-1) Each disease has its own patterns of illness and death. Human malaria is caused by five different parasites in the genus *Plasmodium,* but *P. falciparum* was responsible for 99% of the 445,000 malaria deaths in 2016, 70% of which occurred in children under 5 years old[.3](#page-2-2) Annual statistics are less meaningful when it comes to yellow fever, as it occurs in outbreaks.[4](#page-2-3) For the unvaccinated individual, the chance of dying from yellow fever is about one in four. Infected people of all ages proceed through fever and liver malfunction that results in the characteristic black vomit of the disease. Dengu[e5](#page-2-4) is caused by four different virus serotypes, and most deaths occur in children during their second infection. Fewer than 5% of dengue-infected children die and approximately 85% show no sign of illness; however, the infection can be so widespread that the problem is very conspicuous on a regional scale. In severe dengue, a child who seems to be suffering from a particularly bad influenza-like illness suddenly goes into shock as their blood spontaneously coagulates, usually with death in a few hours (dengue hemorrhagic fever). A larger proportion of adults than children have high fever and pain, sometimes with symptoms that continue for months. One of the most disturbing facts about dengue is that it is increasing worldwide: there were about 500,000 cases recorded in the year 2000, increasing to 3,000,000 in 2015.

# **ECOLOGY OF VECTOR-BORNE DISEASES**

The nature of arthropod-borne diseases is different from others. In simpler disease systems, the fomite is inanimate as a droplet or residue. Although that fomite may be moved around, it does not change position in a directed manner. In contrast, arthropodborne diseases are carried to their hosts by "fomites" that aim for the host to find a blood meal. From the standpoint of the pathogen, transmission is much more targeted and the pathogen is not only carried around by the host reservoir, it is also carried around by the vector. Although these are advantages to the pathogen from the standpoint of efficiency and distribution, the association with vectors is also a complication that creates a more finely tuned system that is more susceptible to disruption. Vector abundance, vector distribution, vector contact with the pathogens' hosts, and vector longevity are all essential links in the chain of transmission[6](#page-2-5) —and all can be disrupted intentionally by vector control. Considered historically, most vector-borne diseases have been reduced in importance by general improvements in the level of living that reduce the number of arthropod vectors living close to humans. Among some obvious examples are bubonic plague transmitted by rodent fleas, epidemic typhus transmitted by body lice, and malaria transmitted by anopheline mosquitoes. There are counter-examples where human–vector contact has increased, such as for dengue and Zika viruses, because they are transmitted by an urban mosquito favored by the initial stages of urban and economic development.[7](#page-2-6) Lyme disease[8](#page-2-7) is another example of a problem on the rise, as some of the efforts to preserve the environment and unintended urban adaptation of deer have resulted in increased contact between humans and deer-associated ticks.

# **PERSONAL AND HOUSEHOLD VECTOR CONTROL**

Vector control can be put into two categories. First are the measures that can be taken by the individual to protect a small, spatially limited group. Second are larger-scale, organized measures intended to protect entire communities. Methods for either are abundantly available in current technology, and many improvements are under development.The world has probably not seen so much innovation in vector control since the 1940s, when the power of synthetic chemistry was first applied to pathogen-transmitting arthropods.[9,10](#page-2-8)

Individuals can protect themselves very well against the vectors that do not move much. Some of the important ones are highly associated with people, like lice, and others find human habitations a good substitute for animal nests and bedding places, like triatomine bugs and some fleas. A framework of four steps includes most of the measures that might be taken against these arthropods (Box [148.1](#page-1-0))[.11](#page-3-0)

The first is to stop them at their source. The containerdeveloping mosquitoes (chiefly *Aedes aegypti* and *A. albopictus*) that transmit yellow fever, dengue, chikungunya, and Zika viruses generally fly less than 100 meters from their larval sites so that individual efforts to remove or cover stored water can reduce the chances of transmission for both the resident and neighbors. Larval sites can also be treated with a variety of insecticides, including some that are considered safe in drinking water. Management of domestic animals and commensal rodents can reduce numbers of fleas and triatomines.

The second step is to kill the vectors that have escaped efforts to stop them at their sources. Killing an insect can be as simple as crushing it, but more efficient methods take advantage of the <span id="page-1-0"></span>**BOX 148.1** Four Steps to Protect the Individual and the Household

#### **STOP ARTHROPOD VECTORS AT THEIR SOURCES**

The source of some or all of the problem arthropods is often within the control of the person who might be bitten. A minimal understanding of the biology of the vector may be all that is needed to remove the place where it comes from. For example, *Aedes aegypti* mosquito vectors of yellow fever, chikungunya, Zika, and dengue usually develop in containers either inside or just outside the home. Rodent infestations can lead to fleas and mites that carry pathogens. Domestic animals' feces often create development sites for house flies and other flies that carry enteric pathogens.

#### **CREATE A BARRIER BETWEEN THE PEOPLE AND THE VECTORS**

Houses can be effective barriers against the movement of arthropods into the spaces occupied by people. Screening, solid walls and floors, and good doors are important. For some mosquitoes, like *Culex quinquefasciatus,* vector of viruses and filariae, an interior door to the bedrooms prevents these mosquitoes from filtering into bedrooms and reduces the number of bites experienced while sleeping. Clothing is also an effective barrier to many bites, especially with the right weave, when worn in two layers, or when treated with one of several insecticides.

#### **KILL THE VECTOR ARTHROPODS BEFORE THEY REACH PEOPLE**

Pesticides should be used carefully and in accordance with label directions. Safely applied, they can kill any arthropod that lands on them or walks across them. Coils and heated devices for dissemination of safe insecticides can work well if air movement is not too great. For mosquitoes, application to the outsides of homes and to vegetation near homes will reduce numbers. Indoors, aerosols will kill insects flying in a room and are often useful to clear a bedroom of mosquitoes. Other indoor applications may require professionals to do a good job, such as treatment of triatomine bugs, vectors of the pathogens of Chagas disease.

#### **USE A REPELLENT ON THE SKIN TO PREVENT BITES**

Repellents can be highly effective at stopping bites. The main disadvantage of repellents is that they must be applied carefully, sometimes several times a day. Most people are motivated to use repellents when they are exposed to many bites, but it is hard to get populations in endemic areas to use repellents consistently for disease prevention.

vectors' behavior to bring them into contact with a lethal situation. Lethality is most often provided by an insecticide, but electrical grids, traps, and predators are also used. The application to vector behavior follows one of two patterns. Either it presents the lethal source to a place where the vector will be located during the normal pursuit of its life cycle, or it attracts the vector to the lethal source.

Insecticides not combined with an attractant are applied as a residual layer to kill vectors that walk or land on the surface, as an aerosol to kill flying insects, or in water to kill mosquito larvae.[12](#page-3-1) The challenge is safety, as with any household insecticide. In agriculture, many measures are taken to minimize contact between people and pesticides, whereas in personal vector control, the chemical is necessarily applied near people. As a result, the selection of active ingredients for vector control is extremely limited. Some of the risk is to the applicator, and for that reason organophosphates (e.g., pirimiphos methyl) and carbamates (e.g., bendiocarb) are almost always applied by professionals for community vector control. Pyrethroids are also applied by professionals, but they are safe enough in many products for use by individuals, for example, in the typical household aerosol or residual pest spray. The other end of the safety equation is exposure to the insecticide by residents after application, with special attention to children. Children are at greater physiologic risk because any toxicant absorbed through the skin will cause a relatively larger exposure due to a surfaceto-volume ratio greater than in adults. Possibly more important, children are likely to be exposed to household insecticides through the oral route, by putting objects in their mouths, licking surfaces, or eating with unwashed hands.

Safe products can be applied most effectively by the resident in places where the vector is likely to crawl or land, either outside or inside the home. The quality of site selection is likely to vary a great deal with experience. Aerosols provide a very temporary effect, but they can be important to clear a room of potentially infected mosquitoes or sand flies in the evening. Larval treatments (larvicides) are sometimes used by residents to control *A. aegypti* and other container-developing mosquitoes, with the most common active ingredients being temephos, pyriproxyfen, *Bacillus thuringiensis israelensis* (Bti) toxin, and methoprene. Programs have also been designed around residential application of predators in containers, including fish, predatory copepods, nymphs of Odonata, and predatory mosquitoes (e.g., *Toxorhynchites amboinensis*).

The concept of using an attractant to make a trap for vectors is very popular for residents. Possibly because a trap is a visible reminder of protection and because a trap seems less contaminating than other applications of chemicals, there are many products on the market with a wide range of efficacy. Traps have been shown to achieve effective control in some situations. Based on good data, they can be helpful against *A. aegypti,* using qualities of an egg-laying site as the attractant.[13](#page-3-2) Traps are also used routinely to protect food-handling establishments from house flies (*Musca domestica*) that can be vectors of enteric pathogens. Those traps are based on attraction to ultraviolet light or to 9(Z)-tricosene (muscalure). Mosquito and sand fly attractants have been discovered. These chemicals may be useful for control, but their broad-scale use is still under development.

A third step for household protection is the erection of barriers between the vectors and people. Well-constructed houses provide protection simply through the existence of walls, doors, and roofs. Window screening may provide additional protection. Recent attention to design of tropical homes to minimize vector contact is an interesting integration of architecture, household practice, and entomology (see the BOVA network—Building Out Vector-Borne Diseases— [https://www.bovanetwork.org/\)](https://www.bovanetwork.org/). Clothing is the last barrier between biting arthropods and a person's skin. Coverage of the skin, the texture of cloth, and layers of clothing all have an influence on bites. Barriers are often combined with pesticides to kill the arthropods attempting to cross them. Of course, insecticidetreated bed nets are a staple for malaria control in Africa.[14](#page-3-3) Treated window screens, tents, and clothing are also available.

Finally, either spatial or topical repellents can be a last line of defense against biting arthropods.[15](#page-3-4) Topical repellents (i.e., those applied to the skin) can be highly effective against a wide variety of biting arthropods for 2 to 12 hours, depending on formulation and use. Standard active ingredients, all of which have similar efficacy, include DEET, IR3535, picaridin, and *para-*menthane diol (so-called *oil of lemon eucalyptus*).There are also many repellents with mixtures of botanical extracts, but these are generally less effective than the active ingredients mentioned. Effective use of topical repellents requires some attention from the individual so that they are more useful to protect individuals during relatively short periods of exposure (Table [148.1\)](#page-2-9).

Spatial repellents release a chemical vapor into the air at a high enough concentration to either incapacitate or repel the vector. A wide variety of chemistries have been used, but current

<span id="page-2-9"></span>

| Repellent | Effectiveness                                                                                                  | Advantages                                                                                                  | Disadvantages                                                                                                            | Usual<br>Percentage | Cost per Hour of<br>Protection** |
|-----------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------|----------------------------------|
| DEET      | Chiggers, biting midges,<br>black flies, sand flies,<br>stable flies, horse/deer<br>flies, tsetse flies, fleas | Cheap, long safety and<br>evaluation record, broad<br>spectrum protection                                   | Oily, distinct odor, melts<br>plastics, irritates eyes, not<br>as effective against ticks,<br>triatomine bugs, Anopheles | 5.6%–100%           | \$0.022 to \$0.098               |
| Picaridin | Ticks, chiggers, biting mites,<br>mosquitoes, biting midges,<br>stable flies, fleas                            | Broad spectrum, does not melt<br>plastics, low odor, not as<br>oily, works at lower<br>concentrations       | Less experience with use, not<br>as effective against ticks,<br>some malaria mosquitoes,<br>biting midges                | 5%–20%              | \$0.032 to \$0.069               |
| IR3535    | Ticks, chiggers, biting mites,<br>mosquitoes, biting midges,<br>sand flies, horse/deer flies                   | Extremely safe, long evaluation<br>record, low odor, not oily,<br>does not melt plastics, broad<br>spectrum | Repellency sometimes fails at<br>low concentrations                                                                      | 20%                 | \$0.034 to \$0.055               |
| PMD*      | Ticks, mosquitoes, biting<br>midges, biting flies                                                              | Good against Anopheles and<br>ticks, botanical derivative                                                   | Only partially evaluated, some<br>preparations have strong<br>odor, irritates the eye                                    | 16%–26%             | \$0.0037 to \$0.055              |

<span id="page-2-11"></span>\**Para*-menthane diol, the active ingredient in oil of lemon eucalyptus.

products mostly take advantage of volatile pyrethroids (allethrin, transfluthrin, or metafluthrin). The vapor may be released passively from a device with sufficient surface area, from a heated solid or liquid reservoir, or from a mechanically aerosolized or aerated device. These systems work if air movement is high enough to disperse the vapor but low enough not to overdilute it.

# **COMMUNITY-LEVEL VECTOR CONTROL**

Community vector control efforts can be a multiplication of the methods applied by individuals. For example, indoor residual spraying[16](#page-3-5) or the use of long-lasting insecticide-treated bed nets (LLIN) can be provided to communities in the form of organized campaigns. Such efforts at large-scale coverage of individuals are best accompanied by communication outreach, both to explain the process and to gain cooperation from as many individuals as possible. Community vector control may also involve methods that would never be used by the individual. Examples include systematic treatment of mosquito larval sites like ponds, stream margins, and rice fields, or outdoor application of aerosols from the ground or air. Community vector control can be much more effective than individual efforts for some disease systems because it can achieve a shift in the age structure of the vector population. Even when the population of a vector species remains high, it cannot transmit a pathogen if most of them do not live long enough for development of that pathogen to an infective stage.

Community-based efforts in the tropics are often hampered by the requirement for efficient logistics and data-driven decision making. Good surveillance can increase the efficiency of an operation tremendously by targeting where vector control is practiced and by evaluating when it is effective. The challenges of achieving such organization in some locations where vector-borne diseases are particularly bad have motivated measures that can be applied broad-scale and without too much organization beyond their implementation. Universal coverage with LLINs in Africa against malaria has been a successful example, thanks to the very low-cost and straightforward application of the intervention. New methods that involve mass release of sterile male insects or genetically modified insects[17](#page-3-6) similarly intend to overcome the organizational challenges of highly targeted insecticide-based tools. Ideally, gene drive would require relatively little effort as the genes deleterious to either the vector or the pathogen spread throughout a wild population of arthropods. Such a virus-like spread of a gene through a wild population naturally raises concerns with the public and regulators so that the burden of proof is on gene drive to show that it would be safe for the environment. Even if a gene-drive construct was not completely effective or did not last indefinitely in the population, it could still be very useful against a particularly problematic species like *Anopheles gambiae,* the major vector of malarial parasites in Africa. Presumably, its use would be less controversial against an invasive species, like *A. aegypti,* because such a species would not be perceived as a natural part of the ecosystem.

# **CONCLUSION**

A vision for the future of large-scale vector-borne disease control was recently described by the World Health Organization (WHO) in their Global Vector Control Response (GVCR)[.2](#page-2-1) Unique for vector control, this document received the approval of the highest authority in the WHO, the World Health Assembly. This action was taken in response to the alarming emergence of Zika virus as a worldwide health threat, but the GVCR applies to all vectorborne diseases. It describes how vector-control tools should be applied in intelligent combination, in full recognition of the challenges of resistance with care for environmental and human safety, and cost-effectively through accurate targeting. This concentration on achieving vector control effectively combined with the availability of some truly innovative new tools will hopefully overcome old challenges and decrease the damage from new ones.

### REFERENCES

- <span id="page-2-0"></span>1. Poinar G Jr. *Plasmodium dominicana* n. sp. (Plasmodiidae: Haemosporidida). Syst Parasitol 2005;61:47–52.
- <span id="page-2-1"></span>2. World Health Organization. Global Vector Control Response 2017-2030. Geneva: Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO; 2017.
- <span id="page-2-2"></span>3. World Health Organization. World Malaria Report 2017. Geneva: Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO; 2017.
- <span id="page-2-3"></span>4. Crosby MC. The American plague. New York: Berkley Books; 2007.
- <span id="page-2-4"></span>5. Thomas SJ, Strickman D, Vaughn DW. Dengue epidemiology: virus epidemiology, ecology, and emergence.Adv Virus Res 2003;61:235–89.
- <span id="page-2-5"></span>6. Smith DL, Battle KE, Hay SI, et al. Ross, Macdonald, and a theory for the dynamics and control of mosquito-transmitted pathogens. PLoS Pathog 2012;8(4):e1002588.
- <span id="page-2-6"></span>7. Powell JR,Tabachnik WJ. History of domestication and spread of *Aedes aegypti –* a review. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz 2013;108(Suppl.I):11–17.
- <span id="page-2-7"></span>8. Steere AC, Coburn J, Glickstein L. The emergence of Lyme disease. J Clin Invest 2004;113:1093–101.
- <span id="page-2-8"></span>9. Achee NL, Gould F, Perkins TA, et al. A critical assessment of vector control for dengue prevention. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2015;9(5):e0003655.

<span id="page-2-10"></span><sup>\*\*</sup>Based on prices in 2007 for liquid or cream formulations.

- 10. MacDonald M. Landscape of new vector control products. U.S. Agency for International Development Cooperative Agreement No. AID-OAA-A-14-00057; 2015. [https://www.vector-works.org/resources/](https://www.vector-works.org/resources/landscape-of-new-vector-control-products/) [landscape-of-new-vector-control-products/.](https://www.vector-works.org/resources/landscape-of-new-vector-control-products/)
- <span id="page-3-0"></span>11. Strickman D, Frances SP, Debboun M. Prevention of bug bites, stings, and disease. New York: Oxford University Press; 2009.
- <span id="page-3-1"></span>12. Becker N, Petrić D, Boase C, et al. Mosquitoes and their control, vol. 2. New York: Springer; 2003.
- <span id="page-3-2"></span>13. Buckner EA,Williams KF, Marsicano AL, et al. Evaluating the vector control potential of the In2Care® Mosquito Trap against *Aedes aegypti* and *Aedes albopictus* under semifield conditions in Manatee County, Florida. J Am Mosq Control Assoc 2017;33:193–9.
- <span id="page-3-3"></span>14. Bhatt S, Weiss DJ, Cameron E, et al. The effect of malaria control on *Plasmodium falciparum* in Africa between 2000 and 2015. Nature 2015;526(7572):207–11.
- <span id="page-3-4"></span>15. Debboun M, Frances SP, Strickman D. Insect repellents handbook. Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press; 2015.
- <span id="page-3-5"></span>16. Pluess B,Tanser FC, Lengeler C, Sharp BL.Indoor residual spraying for preventing malaria. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010;(4):CD006657.
- <span id="page-3-6"></span>17. Burt A, Coulibaly M, Crisanti A, et al. Gene drive to reduce malaria transmission in sub-Saharan Africa. J Responsible Innov 2018;5(sup1):S66–80.