### **130.4** Dipylidiasis

Karen A. Alroy, Robert H. Gilman

#### INTRODUCTION

Dipylidium caninum is the most common cestode of domestic dogs. It can also infect cats. It is a small-to-medium-sized (10–50 cm) tapeworm, pink in color, with double-pored, barrel-shaped segments. It can infect humans when a person accidentally swallows an infected flea (Ctenocephalides canis or C. felis)<sup>2</sup> or louse (Trichodectes spp.).

#### **EPIDEMIOLOGY**

Humans, usually young children (6 months–5 years old), acquire infection after accidental ingestion of fleas or lice during contact with pets.<sup>3</sup> Prevalence in dogs ranges from 1% to 60% from studies in South and Central America. In Europe, prevalence in wild foxes ranges from 1% to 50%, including in Spain, France, England, and Greece.<sup>3</sup>

# NATURAL HISTORY, PATHOGENESIS, AND PATHOLOGY

Infection is transmitted to dogs (or cats) by ingesting fleas or body lice that are infected with the larval cysticercoid stage of the tapeworm. More than 20 to 30 tapeworms of different lengths may reside in the dog small intestine, with each worm containing 60 to 175 proglottids. Egg packets can be expelled by the contraction of the proglottid or by disintegration of the proglottids in the perianal region. Each oncosphere has six hooklets.<sup>4,5</sup>

### **CLINICAL FEATURES**

Close contact between young children and dogs and cats can result in dipylidiasis; however, infection is commonly asymptomatic. Proglottids can cause anal irritation, loss of appetite, abdominal pain, or diarrhea.<sup>6</sup>

## PATIENT EVALUATION, DIAGNOSIS, AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Detection occurs primarily by the discovery of small, white, motile, ricelike segments in underwear or diapers. Microscopic confirmation can be made by the presence of characteristic egg packets/sacs containing numerous hooked oncospheres.<sup>7</sup>

#### TREATMENT

Praziquantel and niclosamide are effective treatments. Regular treatment of pet dogs or cats with anti-helminthics and anti-flea collars is preventive.<sup>8</sup>

#### REFERENCES

- <span id="page-0-0"></span>1. Brandstetter W, Auer H. *Dipylidium caninum*, a rare parasite in man. Wien Klin Wochenschr 1994;106:115–16, [article in German].
- <span id="page-0-1"></span> Andreassen J. Intestinal tapeworms. In: Cox FEG, Kreier JP, Wakelin D, editors. Topley and Wilson's microbiology and microbial infection, vol. 5. 9th ed. London: Arnold; 1998. p. 521–37.
- <span id="page-0-2"></span> Neira OP, Jofré ML, Muñoz SN. Dipŷlidium caninum infection in a 2 year old infant: case report and literature review. Rev Chilena Infectol 2008;25:465–71.
- <span id="page-0-3"></span>4. Thompson RCA, McManus DP. Aetiology: parasites and life cycles. In: Eckert J, Thompson RC, Bucklar H, et al, editors. Manual on echinococcosis in humans and animals: a public health problem of global concern. Geneva: World Organization for Animal Health; 2001. p. 1–19.
- Schantz PM. Tapeworms (cestodiasis). Gastroenterol Clin North Am 1996;25:637–53.
- <span id="page-0-4"></span> Despommier DD, Gwadz RW, Hotez PJ. Parasitic diseases. 3rd ed. New York. Berlin: Springer; 1994.
- <span id="page-0-5"></span> Raether W, Hanel H. Epidemiology, clinical manifestations and diagnosis of zoonotic cestode infections: an update. Parasitol Res 2003;91: 412–38
- <span id="page-0-6"></span>8. Mehlhorn H. Encyclopedic reference of parasitology, vol. 1: Biologystructure-function; vol. 2: Diseases-treatment-therapy. 2nd ed. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer; 2001.