# **137.2** Leeches

*David A. Warrell*

### KEY FEATURES

- • Land and aquatic leeches are blood-sucking annelids, most common in tropical forests, rivers, and lakes.
- • Bleeding continues after the leech has fed and detached because of salivary anti-coagulants.
- • Prevention is by protective clothing and liberal use of diethyl toluamide (DEET) repellent.
- • Attached leeches should be gently removed. Chemicals may encourage regurgitation into, and infection of, the wound (e.g., with their symbiotic *Aeromonas hydrophila*).

Leeches (phylum Annelida, class Hirudinea) are blood-sucking, hermaphroditic, egg-laying annelids that attach their elongated annulated bodies to leaves, rocks, or the host by a posterior sucker. By standing on the posterior sucker and waving the anterior sucker, they can sense their prey with amazing efficiency. They drop on to the prey or pursue it with a looping or lashing motion. The anterior sucker contains the mouth, armed with three radially arranged jaws, which make a Y-shaped incision and secrete saliva containing a histamine-like vasodilator and anti-coagulants, such as hirudin [from the medicinal leech (*Hirudo medicinalis*), which inhibits thrombin and factor IXa]; hementin (from *Haementeria ghilianii,* which is directly fibrinolytic); and hementerin [from *Haementeria depressa* (*Haementeria lutzi*), a plasminogen activator]. Other enzymes include esterases, anti-trypsin, anti-plasmin, and anti-elastase.[1](#page-0-0)

Land leeches, 1 to 8 cm long, infest rainforest vegetation and usually attach themselves to the lower legs or ankles after a bite that may be painless. They ingest about a milliliter of blood in 1 hour and then drop off, but the wound continues to bleed sometimes for a week.

Aquatic leeches are swallowed when stagnant water is drunk. They invade the mouth, nostrils, eyes, vulva, vagina, urethra, or anus of swimmers and bathers, penetrating to the nasal cavity, nasopharynx, oropharynx, trachea, bronchus, esophagus, uterus, rectum, bladder, and peritoneal cavity.

Blood-sucking leeches have a global distribution but have the greatest impact in damp forests of the subtropical and tropical regions of the Indo-Pacific region. Pond, lake, and stream water is often used for bathing, washing clothes, washing utensils and animals, and human consumption in villages. Leeches are commonly present in ponds, particularly in the rainy season.

### **PREVENTION**

Apply repellents such as dibutyl phthalate, diethyl toluamide, or tobacco to skin, trousers, socks, and the inside and outside of footwear. Children should be discouraged from bathing in leechinfested waters. Drinking water must be boiled or filtered. Leechproof gaiters and tight bathing trunks may offer some protection against invasion by land and aquatic leeches, respectively.

## **CLINICAL FEATURE[S2](#page-0-1)**

The main effect is blood loss, but other symptoms include local soreness, secondary infection, residual itching, and phobia. Although ingested aquatic leeches may penetrate the bronchi or esophagus, they usually attach to the pharynx or nasal passages, causing a feeling of movement at the back of the throat with cough, hoarseness, stridor, breathlessness, epistaxis, hemoptysis, hematemesis, and fatal upper airway obstruction. Leeches are no longer thought to be a cause of "halzoun" (Lebanon) or "marrara" (Sudan) (Chapter 141). Leeches penetrating the anus may reach the rectosigmoid junction causing perforation and peritonitis. Bleeding persists for about 10 hours but can last for up to a week after the leech has dropped off. Transmission of pathogens has been suggested but not proved—except in the case of wound infection by *Aeromonas hydrophila,* which lives symbiotically in the leech's gut.

# **TREATMENT[3,4](#page-0-2)**

Leeches will detach if salt, alcohol, turpentine, or vinegar is applied, but these chemicals may make the leech regurgitate into the wound. Gentle mechanical removal after irrigation with 0.9% saline is preferred, but avoid pulling off the leech so roughly that its mouth parts are left in the wound to cause chronic infection. A styptic, such as silver nitrate, or a firm dressing stops the bleeding. Invasive aquatic leeches must be removed by endoscope or cryoprobe, aided by lignocaine (lidocaine), 30% cocaine, 10% tartaric acid, or dilute (1:10,000) epinephrine in the nasopharynx, larynx, trachea, or esophagus, and concentrated salt solution in the genitourinary tract and rectum.

#### REFERENCES

- <span id="page-0-0"></span>1. Sawyer RT. Leech biology and behaviour. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1986.
- <span id="page-0-1"></span>2. Montazeri F, Bedayat A, Jamali L, et al. Leech endoparasitism: report of a case and review of the literature. Eur J Pediatr 2009;168:39–42.
- <span id="page-0-2"></span>3. Keegan HL. Leeches as pests of man in the Pacific region. In: Keegan HL, McFarlane WR, editors. Venomous and poisonous animals and noxious plants of the Pacific region. Oxford: Pergamon Press; 1963. p. 99–104.
- 4. Chen WC, Chien CY, Yang CH, et al. Nasal leech infestation: report of seven leeches and literature review. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol 2010;267(8):1225–9.