# **<sup>36</sup> 36** Viral Febrile Illnesses and Emerging Pathogens

*Timothy P. Endy*

### KEY FEATURES

- • The majority of emerging diseases are caused by viruses, with many that are transmitted by insect vectors or are zoonotic.
- • RNA viruses in particular have high mutation rates and can evolve rapidly in new and changing environments. This, in combination with societal factors, climate change, and rapid travel, has increased the number of epidemics from emerging pathogens in the last several decades.
- • Understanding the travel history, incubation time of potential viruses, and the clinical presentation by illness day is essential in making the right diagnosis and identifying the infecting virus.

### **INTRODUCTION**

*Emerging diseases and/or pathogens* is a term used frequently when describing new or spreading infections in the human population. It is a term used to describe the emergence of previously unrecognized pathogens that produce human disease or recognized pathogens expanding in different ways through the population[.1](#page--1-0) Emerging diseases have historically been responsible for civilizationaltering events. Bubonic plague during the 14th century was responsible for the death of 60% of the European population[.2](#page--1-1) The Spanish flu pandemic in 1918 resulted in the death of 50 to 100 million worldwide; the rinderpest epidemic in livestock in Eastern Africa during the 19th century resulted in the starvation of 75% of the Massai population; and potato blight produced the Irish potato famine, reducing the Irish population by 25%.[3](#page--1-2) Our generation has had dramatic experiences in the last decade with emerging or reemerging pathogens that rapidly spread and result in death or illness in large segments of the population, to include many of the pathogens mentioned in this section and outlined in this book, such as Ebola and Zika viruses. For the clinician, the challenge is to distinguish a viral febrile illness caused by an endemic pathogen from one that is "emerging" and has the potential for human-to-human spread, requiring isolation and, if available, targeted therapy. The scenario is common: a patient presents to the emergency room, usually on a weekend, with fever and a constellation of symptoms and a recent history of travel overseas. The fear is this Ebola, Lassa fever, or another unknown contagious pathogen, and are the clinician and the staff at risk? In this section the epidemiology, clinical features, and evaluation of the patient with a potential viral febrile illness from an emerging pathogen are discussed.

#### **EPIDEMIOLOGY**

We are humbled by a 2011 editorial entitled "Microbiology by Numbers," which estimates that "if all the 1 × 1031 viruses on earth were laid end to end, they would stretch for 100 million light years!"[4](#page--1-3) Additionally in this editorial, it is estimated that there are approximately 1400 known species of human pathogens which includes viruses, bacteria, fungi, and parasites and represents 1% of the total number of microbial species on the earth[.4](#page--1-3) Approximately 50% of the human pathogens have an origin in the animal species.[5](#page--1-4) The potential of the remaining 99% of microbial species to adapt and transform into potential human pathogens is daunting and emphasizes the challenges we face in recognizing and predicting the next epidemic. [Table 36.1](#page-0-0) lists the reported outbreaks by year as reported by the World Health Organization.[6](#page--1-5) Conclusions that we can draw from this table are that the majority of the reported outbreaks of diseases in the world are caused by viruses, the majority of these viruses are RNA viruses, most have an animal reservoir in their life cycle, and the majority of outbreaks affect developing countries and potential "hot spots" for emerging pathogens. Jones et al. analyzed 335 emerging infectious disease events between 1940 and 2004[.7](#page--1-6) Emerging disease events were found to have risen significantly over time, with the peak number of events occurring in the 1980s corresponding to the HIV pandemic. Emerging disease events were predominantly zoonotic (60.3%), originated from wildlife

<span id="page-0-0"></span>

| TABLE 36.1 Reported Disease Outbreaks by Year |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
|-----------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Year                                          | Outbreaks by Pathogen                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| 2017                                          | Marburg virus, plague, MERS-CoV, dengue fever,<br>influenza (H7N9), chikungunya, yellow fever, cholera,<br>hepatitis E, meningococcus, hepatitis A, Zika virus.                                                                       |
| 2016                                          | Poliovirus, MERS-CoV, dengue fever, avian influenza<br>(H7N9, H5N6), Rift Valley fever, monkeypox,<br>chikungunya, enterohemorrhagic E. coli, yellow fever,<br>Lassa fever, salmonellosis, Zika virus, Elizabethkingia,<br>oropouche. |
| 2015                                          | Poliovirus, MERS-CoV, cholera, avian influenza (H7N9),<br>chikungunya, plague, Lassa fever, Zika virus, measles,<br>meningococcus, typhoid fever, Ebola.                                                                              |
| 2014                                          | Ebola, avian influenza (H7N9, H5N6), West Nile virus,<br>plague, Marburg, polio, MERS-CoV, chikungunya,<br>enterovirus D68, cholera, yellow fever.                                                                                    |
| 2013                                          | MERS-CoV, avian influenza (H7N9), yellow fever, polio,<br>cholera, meningococcus, novel coronavirus.                                                                                                                                  |
| 2012                                          | Yellow fever, novel coronavirus, Ebola, Marburg, Rift<br>Valley fever, dengue fever, cholera, hantavirus<br>pulmonary syndrome, enterovirus 71, meningococcus.                                                                        |
| 2011                                          | Yellow fever, polio, cholera, enterohemorrhagic E. coli,<br>Ebola, measles, avian influenza (H5N1).                                                                                                                                   |
| 2010                                          | Avian influenza (H5N1), cholera, polio, yellow fever,<br>plague, pandemic influenza (H1N1), Rift Valley fever.                                                                                                                        |
| 2009                                          | Pandemic influenza (H1N1), avian influenza (H5N1),<br>yellow fever, dengue fever, swine influenza (A/H1N1),<br>polio, cholera, Ebola.                                                                                                 |
| 2008                                          | Cholera, Ebola, yellow fever, avian influenza (H5N1),<br>Marburg, polio, enterovirus, Rift Valley fever.                                                                                                                              |

Source: Disease outbreaks by year: World Health Organization; [Available from: [http://www.who.int/csr/don/archive/year/en/.](http://www.who.int/csr/don/archive/year/en/)] (71.8%), and are increasing over time. Factors that determine the emergence of these viruses include (1) high mutation rate and adaptation of the RNA viruses; (2) human intimacy (cross-species transmission) and movement of animal species due to land development and migration from political conflicts; (3) increase in urbanization; (4) climate change with increase and spread of potential insect vectors and changes in migratory patterns of birds; and (5) societal mobility through air travel.[8](#page--1-7)

## **CLINICAL FEATURES**

Emerging viral pathogens can, in general, present in one of the following clinical categories: (1) generalized febrile illness producing a "viral syndrome," (2) fever with meningitis/encephalitis, (3) fever with joint pain, (4) hemorrhagic fever, and (5) birth defects. Due to human host and viral diversity, many viruses can produce illness across the spectrum of these clinical categories. For example, dengue virus as a first infection can result in a sub-clinical infection or a febrile illness that results in a self-limited fever, myalgia, bone pain, and transient laboratory abnormalities. On second infection, dengue virus in a minority of patients can produce a severe hemorrhagic disease. Chikungunya and Ross River viruses can produce a generalized febrile illness but also severe joint pains that can persist for months. Japanese encephalitis, West Nile, and the equine encephalitis viruses are classic viruses that produce a meningo-encephalitis in 1% of the persons infected. Yellow fever and the filoviruses (Ebola and Marburg) are examples of severe hemorrhagic fever viruses. The recent Zika virus outbreak and birth defects associated with infection in pregnant women have broadened our clinical categories to include those that produce birth defects. All viruses produce a constellation of signs and symptoms early in infection that are clinically the same. After infection, an incubation period of normally between 1 and 14 days can occur, with some exceptions. For example, Ebola has been reported to occur 21 days after exposure.[9](#page--1-8) The first onset of symptoms heralds the host immune response with fever followed by generalized symptoms of headache, muscle aches, joint pains, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Early laboratory abnormalities that would indicate a viral infection include leukopenia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. Electrolyte and renal function abnormalities can be common if the patient is volume depleted. As the disease progresses, clinical manifestations will be become more specific for the clinical syndrome and provide clues on the potential virus, such as the onset of headache, neck stiffness, and altered sensorium in the case of encephalitis; severe joint pains; or bleeding internally or externally with blood loss or hemoconcentration, with plasma leakage with the hemorrhagic fevers. Specific manifestations such as diuresis, volume loss, and renal dysfunction can be an indicator for viruses that produce hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome such as the Hantaviruses or Lassa fever. Rash is common to all the viral illnesses and in general indicates a shift in the host immune response from a cell-mediated to a humoral immune response with a rise in antibodies. It is important for the clinician to understand that viremia occurs several days before the onset of clinical illness and through the duration of early clinical symptoms. Pathogens that are spread by insect vectors, the respiratory route, blood-borne contact, or sexually can occur before the onset of clinical symptoms, and thus infect others who come in contact by that route. Contact tracing from the index patient should include the days of viremia before the onset of symptoms.

# **PATIENT EVALUATION, DIAGNOSIS, AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS**

Understanding the incubation time of viral pathogens is the first important step in evaluating the febrile patient. A travel history in an area of an outbreak or potential hot spot for an emerging disease should be within the incubation period of these pathogens (1–21 days). For example, a febrile patient in your clinic or emergency room who had traveled overseas 3 months before fever would be unlikely to have a viral infection, and potential other etiologies such as non-falciparum malaria or a parasitic infection should be considered. An extensive travel history and exposures while traveling will help to determine the risk for the patient to acquire a local infection. An important question often not asked is "who else is sick in your travel party, and have you been in contact with anyone acutely ill?" This can often be an important clue on the risk of acquiring an infection. If the patient is within the incubation period and at risk for a viral illness, determining the clinical illness day is important when obtaining the history. Our studies in hospitalized patients with dengue infection, for example, illustrate the importance for the clinician to approach the viral febrile illness and differential of potential viruses by determining the patient's clinical illness day and their clinical manifestation.[10](#page--1-9) [Fig. 36.1](#page--1-10) demonstrates an idealized patient with a viral febrile illness. In this example, after an incubation period of 3 days, the first day of viremia occurs. Viremia will continue, with the onset of fever heralding the first day of clinical illness. In general, the first 3 to 5 days of clinical illness of most viral infections will be a generalized febrile illness with no clinical signs or symptoms that will distinguish the illness to a specific viral pathogen, denoted here as a *viral syndrome.* Headache, myalgia, nausea, diarrhea, and respiratory symptoms will be common during the viral syndrome stage. Influenza, dengue, chikungunya, Ebola, or Lassa fever will all be indistinguishable from each other in the early clinical illness. By day 5 of the clinical illness day, day 9 post-infection, the manifestations will become more specific and hemorrhagic manifestations and coagulopathy will occur, along with plasma leakage and encephalitis. As the host response increases with antibody levels rising and cytokines peaking, the manifestations of a specific viral illness will become apparent as cellular damage occurs.

The diagnosis and diagnostic methods used to identify the viral pathogens are also dependent on the clinical illness day. [Fig.](#page--1-10) [36.1](#page--1-10) demonstrates the time-dependent diagnostic test that can be performed during the clinical course of the patient. In this example, viremia will start before fever and last until 6 days of clinical illness and before the onset of viral-specific IgM and IgG antibodies. During viremia, diagnostic tests should be focused on detecting the virus, whether by viral isolation, molecular techniques, or antigen detection. Viremia starts to resolve with the onset of the host response and corresponding rise in viral-specific IgM and IgG. Antibodies will continue to rise during the convalescent period, and IgG will last several years or more. Once antibodies start to rise, the diagnostics are focused on their detection, with a variety of methods that can be used, including enzyme-linked immunoassays, hemagglutination inhibition, plaque reduction neutralization, and rapid tests.

### **TREATMENT AND CONTROL**

Treatment and control are virus specific, emphasizing the need for early recognition and ordering the appropriate diagnostics. Many of the viruses that are responsible for febrile illnesses and are considered emerging or emerged have no available treatment or vaccine. Reading through the specific viruses and chapters in this book will give the reader valuable information on potential treatments. For vector-borne or zoonotic viruses, control will be specific and include both aerial and larvicidal spraying for mosquitoborne viruses, personal protection practices for both mosquitoes and ticks, and animal control for zoonotic-borne viruses. Contact practices and/or isolation may be appropriate for viruses that can be transmitted human to human, such as the respiratory viruses, Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever, and the filoviruses Marburg and Ebola.