- 15. Colomba C, De Grazia S, Giammanco GM, et al. Viral gastroenteritis in children hospitalised in Sicily, Italy. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2006;25:570–5.
- 16. Liu MQ, Yang BF, Peng JS, et al. Molecular epidemiology of astrovirus infection in infants in Wuhan, China. J Clin Microbiol 2007;45: 1308–9.
- 17. Kiulia NM, Mwenda JM, Nyachieo A, et al. Astrovirus infection in young Kenyan children with diarrhoea. J Trop Pediatr 2007;53: 206–9.
- 18. Nguyen TA, Yagyu F, Okame M, et al. Diversity of viruses associated with acute gastroenteritis in children hospitalized with diarrhea in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam. J Med Virol 2007;79:582–90.
- 19. Victoria M, Carvalho-Costa FA, Heinemann MB, et al. Genotypes and molecular epidemiology of human astroviruses in hospitalized children with acute gastroenteritis in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. J Med Virol 2007;79:939–44.
- 20. Gabbay YB, Leite JP, Oliveira DS, et al. Molecular epidemiology of astrovirus type 1 in Belem, Brazil, as an agent of infantile gastroenteritis, over a period of 18 years (1982-2000): identification of two possible new lineages. Virus Res 2007;129:166–74.
- 21. Fabiana A, Donia D, Gabrieli R, et al. Influence of enteric viruses on gastroenteritis in Albania: epidemiological and molecular analysis. J Med Virol 2007;79:1844–9.
- 22. Nguyen TA, Hoang L, Pham le D, et al. Identification of human astrovirus infections among children with acute gastroenteritis in the southern part of Vietnam during 2005–2006. J Med Virol 2008;80:298–305.
- 23. Papaventsis DC, Dove W, Cunliffe NA, et al. Human astrovirus gastroenteritis in children, Madagascar, 2004–2005. Emerg Infect Dis 2008;14:844–6.
- 24. Dey SK, Islam A, Mizuguchi M, et al. Epidemiological and molecular analysis of astrovirus gastroenteritis in Dhaka City, Bangladesh. J Trop Pediatr 2008;54:423–5.
- 25. Aminu M, Esona MD, Geyer A, Steele AD. Epidemiology of rotavirus and astrovirus infections in children in northwestern Nigeria. Ann Afr Med 2008;7:168–74.
- 26. Lin HC, Kao CL, Chang LY, et al. Astrovirus gastroenteritis in children in Taipei. J Formos Med Assoc 2008;107:295–303.
- 27. Tayeb HT, Dela Cruz DM, Al-Qahtani A, et al. Enteric viruses in pediatric diarrhea in Saudi Arabia. J Med Virol 2008;80:1919–29.
- 28. Andreasi MS, Cardoso DD, Fernandes SM, et al. Adenovirus, calicivirus and astrovirus detection in fecal samples of hospitalized children with acute gastroenteritis from Campo Grande, MS, Brazil. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz 2008;103:741–4.

- 29. Malasao R, Maneekarn N, Khamrin P, et al. Genetic diversity of norovirus, sapovirus, and astrovirus isolated from children hospitalized with acute gastroenteritis in Chiang Mai, Thailand. J Med Virol 2008;80:1749–55.
- 30. Kamel AH, Ali MA, El-Nady HG, et al. Predominance and circulation of enteric viruses in the region of greater Cairo, Egypt. J Clin Microbiol 2009;47:1037–45.
- 31. Huh JW, Kim WH, Moon SG, et al. Viral etiology and incidence associated with acute gastroenteritis in a 5-year survey in Gyeonggi Province, South Korea. J Clin Virol 2009;44:152–6.
- 32. Levidiotou S, Gartzonika C, Papaventsis D, et al. Viral agents of acute gastroenteritis in hospitalized children in Greece. Clin Microbiol Infect 2009;15:596–8.
- 33. Nakanishi K, Tsugawa T, Honma S, et al. Detection of enteric viruses in rectal swabs from children with acute gastroenteritis attending the pediatric outpatient clinics in Sapporo, Japan. J Clin Virol 2009;46: 94–7.
- 34. Sdiri-Loulizi K, Gharbi-Khelifi H, de Rougemont A, et al. Molecular epidemiology of human astrovirus and adenovirus serotypes 40/41 strains related to acute diarrhea in Tunisian children. J Med Virol 2009;81:1895–902.
- 35. Podkolzin AT, Fenske EB, Abramycheva NY, et al. Hospital-based surveillance of rotavirus and other viral agents of diarrhea in children and adults in Russia, 2005–2007. J Infect Dis 2009;200(Suppl. 1):S228–33.
- 36. Verma H, Chitambar SD, Gopalkrishna V. Astrovirus associated acute gastroenteritis in western India: predominance of dual serotype strains. Infect Genet Evol 2010;10:575–9.
- 37. Guo L, Xu X, Song J, et al. Molecular characterization of astrovirus infection in children with diarrhea in Beijing, 2005–2007. J Med Virol 2010;82:415–23.
- 38. De Grazia S, Martella V, Chironna M, et al. Nationwide surveillance study of human astrovirus infections in an Italian paediatric population. Epidemiol Infect 2013;141:524–8.
- 39. Enserink R, van den Wijngaard C, Bruijning-Verhagen P, et al. Gastroenteritis attributable to 16 enteropathogens in children attending day care. Pediatr Infect Dis 2015;34:5–10.
- 40. Shioda K, Cosmas L, Audi A, et al. Population-based incidence rates of diarrheal disease associated with norovirus, sapovirus, and astrovirus in Kenya. PLoS ONE 2016;11(4):e0145943.
- 41. Zaraket H, Abou-El-Hassan H, Kreidieh K, et al. Characterization of astrovirus-associated gastroenteritis in hospitalized children under five years of age. Infect Genet Evol 2017;53:94–9.

# **34.5** Sapovirus

*Miren Iturriza-Gómara, Nigel A. Cunliffe*

# KEY FEATURES

- • Sapovirus is a non-enveloped RNA virus that, on electronic microscopy, has a characteristic cuplike depression, often described as the "Star of David."
- • Sapovirus causes acute-onset, watery, non-bloody diarrhea in infants and young children and is typically less severe than rotavirus.
- • Sapovirus has been reported to account for 2% to 12% of acute gastroenteritis in children younger than 5 years of age in both developing and developed countries but is increasingly recognized as an important cause of community diarrhea in all age groups.
- • The disease is self-limiting, and oral or intravenous rehydration therapy is administered as required.

#### **INTRODUCTION**

Sapovirus is a non-enveloped, positive-sense, single-stranded RNA virus with characteristic cuplike depressions on the surface of the virion, often described as the "Star of David." Although both sapovirus and norovirus belong to the Caliciviridae family, the distinction of sapovirus from norovirus is made by its genome coding strategy in which, unlike norovirus, sapovirus encodes the capsid protein contiguous to the large, non-structural polyprotein (ORF1).

The type species, Sapporo virus, is named after the city of Sapporo, Japan, where the virus was first identified in association with gastroenteritis during an outbreak in an orphanage[.1](#page-1-0) There are currently five recognized genogroups within the *Sapovirus* genus (GI–GV) based on sequence diversity of the virus major capsid protein VP1.[1](#page-1-0)

## **EPIDEMIOLOGY**

Sapovirus prevalence rates reported by studies conducted in different counties range from 2% to 12% of cases of acute gastroenteritis[.2,3](#page-1-1) A recent study in a birth cohort in Peru identified that 84% of children had experienced a sapovirus infection by the age of 2 years and that 64% of the sapovirus infections were associated with symptoms.[4](#page-1-2) Sapovirus infections were also identified as the second most common cause of gastroenteritis in the UK, second only to norovirus infections; they accounted for 26.1 cases of non-medically attended gastroenteritis in the community and for 26.1 cases per 1000 persons/years, compared with 1.5 cases per 1000 persons/years in general practice[,5](#page-1-3) which suggests that sapovirus infections may be associated with milder disease. However, a recent study in South Africa identified that sapoviruses were also associated with a significant proportion of severe cases of diarrhea requiring hospitalization and also with diarrhea-associated deaths[.6](#page-1-4) Transmission of sapovirus is via the fecal–oral route and usually occurs person-to-person and occasionally through contaminated food and drinking water, similar to norovirus[.7](#page-1-5) Although sapoviruses have been associated with outbreaks in different settings, including nosocomial disease, these are significantly less frequent than gastroenteritis outbreaks associated with norovirus.

# **NATURAL HISTORY, PATHOGENESIS, AND PATHOLOGY**

Exposure to sapovirus occurs early in life, as evidenced by >90% seroprevalence rates by the age of 20 to 24 months of age[.8](#page-1-6) Unlike norovirus and rotavirus, susceptibility to sapovirus infection is not associated with histo-blood group antigen phenotype or secretor status.[9](#page-1-7)

## **CLINICAL FEATURES**

After an incubation period of 1 to 3 days, sapovirus infection typically begins with the abrupt onset of watery, non-bloody diarrhea associated with vomiting, fever, and abdominal pain. When it occurs, dehydration tends to be less severe than that caused by rotavirus.[10](#page-1-8) However, in vulnerable populations such as HIVinfected children and those living in overcrowded and unsanitary conditions, sapoviruses may be associated with more severe disease[.7](#page-1-5)

# **PATIENT EVALUATION, DIAGNOSIS, AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS**

Diagnosis of viral gastroenteritis requires laboratory investigation of stool specimens collected in the acute stage of disease. Typical calicivirus-like morphology observed under negativestain electron microscopy is indicative of sapovirus infection; however, definitive diagnosis relies on the identification of sapovirus genome by reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).

Differential diagnosis includes other forms of viral gastroenteritis and pathogenic *Escherichia coli.*

#### **TREATMENT**

The mainstay of treatment comprises correction of dehydration where present. There is neither specific antiviral chemotherapy nor a vaccine available.

#### REFERENCES

- <span id="page-1-0"></span>1. Farkas T, Zhong WM, Jing Y, et al. Genetic diversity among sapoviruses. Arch Virol 2004;149(7):1309–23.
- <span id="page-1-1"></span>2. Monica B, Ramani S, Banerjee I, et al. Human caliciviruses in symptomatic and asymptomatic infections in children in Vellore, South India. J Med Virol 2007;79(5):544–51.
- 3. Lasure N, Gopalkrishna V. Epidemiological profile and genetic diversity of sapoviruses (SaVs) identified in children suffering from acute gastroenteritis in Pune, Maharashtra, Western India, 2007-2011. Epidemiol Infect 2017;145(1):106–14.
- <span id="page-1-2"></span>4. Sanchez GJ, Mayta H, Pajuelo MJ, et al. Epidemiology of sapovirus infections in a birth cohort in Peru. Clin Infect Dis 2018;66(12): 1858–63.
- <span id="page-1-3"></span>5. Tam CC, Rodrigues LC, Viviani L, et al. Longitudinal study of infectious intestinal disease in the UK (IID2 study): incidence in the community and presenting to general practice. Gut 2012;61(1):69–77.
- <span id="page-1-4"></span>6. Page N, Groome MJ, Murray T, et al. Sapovirus prevalence in children less than five years of age hospitalised for diarrhoeal disease in South Africa, 2009-2013. J Clin Virol 2016;78:82–8.
- <span id="page-1-5"></span>7. Oka T, Wang Q, Katayama K, Saif LJ. Comprehensive review of human sapoviruses. Clin Microbiol Rev 2015;28(1):32–53.
- <span id="page-1-6"></span>8. Farkas T, Deng X, Ruiz-Palacios G, et al. Development of an enzyme immunoassay for detection of sapovirus-specific antibodies and its application in a study of seroprevalence in children. J Clin Microbiol 2006;44(10):3674–9.
- <span id="page-1-7"></span>9. Bucardo F, Carlsson B, Nordgren J, et al. Susceptibility of children to sapovirus infections, Nicaragua, 2005-2006. Emerg Infect Dis 2012;18(11):1875–8.
- <span id="page-1-8"></span>10. Sakai Y, Nakata S, Honma S, et al. Clinical severity of Norwalk virus and Sapporo virus gastroenteritis in children in Hokkaido, Japan. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2001;20(9):849–53.