- 9. Fix AD, Abdel-Hamid M, Purcell RH, et al. Prevalence of antibodies to hepatitis E in two rural Egyptian communities. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2000;62(4):519–23.
- 10. Stoszek SK, Engle RE, Abdel-Hamid M, et al. Hepatitis E antibody seroconversion without disease in highly endemic rural Egyptian communities. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2006;100(2):89–94.
- 11. Aggarwal R. Clinical presentation of hepatitis E. Virus Res 2011;161(1):15–22.
- 12. Arankalle VA, Jha J, Favorov MO, et al. Contribution of HEV and HCV in causing fulminant non-A, non-B hepatitis in western India. J Viral Hepat 1995;2(4):189–93.
- 13. Kamar N, Selves J, Mansuy JM, et al. Hepatitis E virus and chronic hepatitis in organ-transplant recipients. N Engl J Med 2008;358(8):811–17.
- 14. Dalton HR, Bendall RP, Keane FE, et al. Persistent carriage of hepatitis E virus in patients with HIV infection. N Engl J Med 2009;361(10):1025–7.
- 15. Purcell RH, Emerson SU. Hepatitis E: an emerging awareness of an old disease. J Hepatol 2008;48(3):494–503.

- 16. Chalmers TC, Eckhardt RD, Reynolds WE, et al. The treatment of acute infectious hepatitis. Controlled studies of the effects of diet, rest, and physical reconditioning on the acute course of the disease and on the incidence of relapses and residual abnormalities. J Clin Invest 1955;34(7 Pt II):1163–235.
- 17. Chalmers TC, Reynolds WE, Eckhardt RD, et al. Treatment of acute infectious hepatitis in the armed forces; advantages of ad lib. bed rest and early reconditioning. J Am Med Assoc 1955;159(15):1431–4.
- 18. El-Kamary SS, Shardell MD, Abdel-Hamid M, et al. A randomized controlled trial to assess the safety and efficacy of silymarin on symptoms, signs and biomarkers of acute hepatitis. Phytomedicine 2009;16(5):391–400.
- 19. Shrestha MP, Scott RM, Joshi DM, et al. Safety and efficacy of a recombinant hepatitis E vaccine. N Engl J Med 2007;356(9):895–903.
- 20. Zhu FC, Zhang J, Zhang XF, et al. Efficacy and safety of a recombinant hepatitis E vaccine in healthy adults: a large-scale, randomised, doubleblind placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet 2010;376(9744):895–902.

## **35.6** Non-A–E Hepatitis

*Samer S. El-Kamary, Shyamasundaran Kottilil*

From 2% to 20% of acute hepatitis cases are not due to any of the well-described hepatitis viruses. Induction of hepatitis in primates with plasma from some non-A–E patients suggests that at least some are caused by an infectious disease.[1](#page-0-0) An RNA virus has been recognized in the plasma of humans with acute non-A–E hepatitis, persons injecting illicit drugs, dialysis patients, and blood donors. It has been provisionally named hepatitis G virus (HGV) or GB virus C[.2](#page-0-1) This agent is a single-stranded, positive-sense RNA virus with approximately 25% nucleic acid identity with HCV. Its occurrence in humans can be demonstrated by detection of RNA and antibody to the viral envelope. HGV/GBV-C infection appears to persist, with a frequency intermediate between those of HBV and HCV without causing liver disease. Neither HGV/ GBV-C or TT virus has been associated with liver disease, and these viruses are probably not hepatropic. HGV has been detected in cases of fulminant hepatitis not due to other recognized viruses. However, there are no data suggesting it causes either acute or chronic liver disease.[3](#page-0-2)

## REFERENCES

- <span id="page-0-0"></span>1. Chu CM, Lin DY, Yeh CT, et al. Epidemiological characteristics, risk factors, and clinical manifestations of acute non-A-E hepatitis. J Med Virol 2001;65(2):296–300.
- <span id="page-0-1"></span>2. Stapleton JT. GB virus type C/hepatitis G virus. Semin Liver Dis 2003;23(2):137–48.
- <span id="page-0-2"></span>3. Reshetnyak VI, Karlovich TI, Ilchenko LU. Hepatitis G virus. World J Gastroenterol 2008;14(30):4725–34.