- 10. Grosdent N, Maridonneau-Parini I, Sory MP, Cornelis GR. Role of yops and adhesins in resistance of *Yersinia enterocolitica* to phagocytosis. Infect Immun 2002;70(8):4165–76.
- 11. Robins-Browne RM, Tzipori S, Gonis G, et al. The pathogenesis of *Yersinia enterocolitica* infection in gnotobiotic piglets. J Med Microbiol 1985;19(3):297–308.
- 12. Robins-Browne RM, Prpic JK. Effects of iron and desferrioxamine on infections with *Yersinia enterocolitica*. Infect Immun 1985;47(3): 774–9.
- 13. Marimon JM, Figueroa R, Idigoras P, et al. Thirty years of human infections caused by *Yersinia enterocolitica* in northern Spain: 1985-2014. Epidemiol Infect 2017;145(11):2197–203.
- 14. Naddei R, Martinelli M, Strisciuglio C, et al. *Yersinia enterocolitica* ileitis mimicking pediatric Crohn's disease. Inflamm Bowel Dis 2017;23(4):E15–16.
- 15. Rosner BM, Werber D, Hohle M, Stark K. Clinical aspects and self-reported symptoms of sequelae of *Yersinia enterocolitica* infections in a populationbased study, Germany 2009-2010. BMC Infect Dis 2013;13:236.
- 16. Zartash Zafar Khan, Salvaggio MR, Bronfin DR. *Yersinia enterocolitica*; 2009. <http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/232343-overview>.
- 17. Haditsch M, Binder L, Gabriel C, et al. *Yersinia enterocolitica* septicemia in autologous blood transfusion. Transfusion 1994;34(10):907–9.

- 18. Melby K, Slordahl S, Gutteberg TJ, Nordbo SA. Septicaemia due to *Yersinia enterocolitica* after oral overdoses of iron. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed) 1982;285(6340):467–8.
- 19. Smego RA, Frean J, Koornhof HJ. Yersiniosis i: microbiological and clinicoepidemiological aspects of plague and non-plague Yersinia infections. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1999;18(1):1–15.
- 20. Van Noyen R, Peeters P, Van Dessel F, Vandepitte J. Mycotic aneurysm of the aorta due to *Yersinia enterocolitica*. Contrib Microbiol Immunol 1987;9:122–6.
- 21. Bottone EJ. Yersinia enterocolitica: the charisma continues. Clin Microbiol Rev 1997;10(2):257–76.
- 22. Maki-Ikola O, Heesemann J, Toivanen A, Granfors K. High frequency of Yersinia antibodies in healthy populations in Finland and Germany. Rheumatol Int 1997;16(6):227–9.
- 23. Thielman NM, Guerrant RL. Clinical practice. Acute infectious diarrhea. N Engl J Med 2004;350(1):38–47.
- 24. Capilla S, Goni P, Rubio MC, et al. Epidemiological study of resistance to nalidixic acid and other antibiotics in clinical *Yersinia enterocolitica* O:3 isolates. J Clin Microbiol 2003;41(10):4876–8.
- 25. Abdel-Haq NM, Papadopol R, Asmar BI, Brown WJ. Antibiotic susceptibilities of *Yersinia enterocolitica* recovered from children over a 12-year period. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2006;27(5):449–52.

# **51.2** *Clostridium* Infections

*S. Asad Ali, Anita K. M. Zaidi*

### KEY FEATURES

- • *Clostridium* spp. are ubiquitous, gram-positive, spore-forming bacteria that cause a wide range of diseases, including botulism, tetanus, soft tissue infections, neonatal sepsis, and enteric infections.
- • *C. perfringens* causes gas gangrene and self-limited food poisoning syndrome associated with eating contaminated beef, poultry, and precooked foods that undergo slow cooling.
- • *C. botulinum* causes botulism, a cause of flaccid paralysis (see Chapter 60).
- • *C. tetani* causes tetanus, a cause of rigid paralysis (see Chapter 59).
- • *C. difficile* is a frequent cause of hospital-associated diarrhea or diarrhea that develops after receiving antibiotics (*C. difficile*–associated diarrhea [CDAD]).
- • Offending antibiotics should be discontinued as soon as possible and clinically indicated if a patient develops *C. difficile*–associated illness. Patients with CDAD should be treated with oral vancomycin or oral or intravenous metronidazole; additional agents may also be effective.

#### **INTRODUCTION**

*Clostridium* spp. are gram-positive, anaerobic, spore-forming bacteria that are found widely in nature, especially in soil, sewage, decaying tissue, and the gastrointestinal tracts of humans and other animals. Of the more than 80 species of clostridia, at least 14 are pathogenic in humans, where they cause diseases such as botulism, tetanus, soft tissue infections, neonatal sepsis, and enteric infections.

#### **EPIDEMIOLOGY**

Two species of clostridia, *C. perfringens* and *C. difficile,* are most commonly associated with enteric illness. Both these organisms and their associated syndromes have worldwide distribution. *C. perfringens* is frequently present in contaminated raw meat and poultry. *C. difficile* is commonly present in soil and in the hospital environment. In many hospitals in industrialized countries, *C. difficile* gastroenteritis has become a major infection control challenge[.1](#page--1-0)

## **NATURAL HISTORY, PATHOGENESIS, AND PATHOLOGY**

*C. perfringens*–associated enteritis occurs when foods (usually beef, poultry, gravy, or dried or precooked foods) heavily contaminated with *C. perfringens* type A are ingested. Spores of *C. perfringens* can survive cooking; these spores germinate and multiply during slow cooling and storage at temperatures from 20°C to 60°C. Infection is usually acquired at banquets or institutions where food is prepared in large quantities and kept warm for prolonged periods. The organism produces an enterotoxin in the colon, which causes crampy abdominal pain and diarrhea. Illness is not transmitted from person to person.

*C. difficile* is often present in hospitals and children's facilities, largely because of its ability to form spores that are resistant to many common disinfectants. It does not usually affect healthy individuals unless the normal intestinal flora is disrupted by the use of antibiotics. *C. difficile* produces two primary toxins—A and B—which produce enterotoxic and cytotoxic effects, respectively[.2](#page--1-1)

#### **CLINICAL FEATURES**

*C. perfringens*–associated food poisoning usually occurs as part of an outbreak. The incubation period ranges from 6 to 24 hours usually 8 to 12 hours. Major symptoms are crampy, mid-epigastric pain, nausea, and non-bloody diarrhea. Vomiting and fever are generally absent. In rare instances, a more severe form of enteritis occurs called *enteritis necroticans*. It is caused by *C. perfringens* type C that produces a beta toxin. Enteritis necroticans is characterized by abdominal cramps, vomiting, diarrhea (which may be bloody), shock, and acute inflammation of the small intestine with areas of necrosis and gangrene. This condition is seen more often after