*Joseph B. McCormick*

#### KEY FEATURES

- • Lassa virus causes Lassa fever, a hemorrhagic disease characterized by fever, generalized weakness and muscle pain, and nausea and vomiting with mucosal bleeding.
- • Fatality occurs in about 15% to 30% of hospitalized patients; fatality is associated with endothelial dysfunction leading to intractable hypovolemic shock, gross edema of the head and neck with pulmonary edema, and respiratory distress.
- • Lassa fever is endemic to West Africa through persistent infection of *Mastomys natalensis,* a peridomestic rodent.
- • Transmission occurs via direct contact with infected rodents or their secretions or by close person-to-person contact.
- • An estimated 300,000 to 500,000 cases occur annually in West Africa with approximately 5000 deaths per year.
- • The disease can be successfully treated, particularly within the first week of illness, by the anti-viral drug ribavirin.
- • Synonyms include Lassa virus and Lassa fever.

# **INTRODUCTION**

Lassa virus, an arenavirus*,* is the etiologic agent of the hemorrhagic disease Lassa fever. The virus is naturally maintained by peridomestic rodent hosts in which persistent, lifelong infection is established. High titers of the virus are present in rodent urine, and exposed humans may become infected as accidental hosts. The virus may be transmitted from person to person. Lassa fever is endemic to West Africa. An estimated 300,000 to 500,000 cases occur annually, resulting in approximately 5000 deaths per year. Although clinical Lassa fever was first described in West Africa in the 1950s, the virus was not isolated until 1969.[1–4](#page-2-0)

### **EPIDEMIOLOGY**

Lassa fever is endemic in several West African countries stretching from Senegal to Cameroon. Although there are periodic increases in cases, much of that is associated with seasonality and rodent movement.[4–7](#page-2-1) Many outbreaks have been associated with nosocomial outbreaks or large gatherings at funerals. In 2018 a large number of infections with Lassa virus occurred in Nigeria. In the first 3 months of 2018, the World Health Organization (WHO) reported 1495 suspected cases and 119 deaths from 19 states in Nigeria. A reported 376 patients were laboratory confirmed, and of these, there were 95 deaths for a case fatality rate of 24.7%. The occurrence of infection in 17 health care workers may support the use of ribavirin for prophylaxis during this outbreak[.8,9](#page-2-2) Seroconversion to Lassa virus ranges from 5% to 22% annually among susceptible (seronegative) populations in endemic areas. Among seroconverts, 9% to 26% develop acute illness. Between 1% and 18% are reinfections. Estimates of prevalence of antibody to Lassa virus range from 4% to 52% among populations in endemic areas. Viruses from different geographic areas may vary in virulence. Case fatality rate among the general population can be as low as 1% to 2%; however, rates increase among hospitalized patients (15%–30%). At least 20 imported cases of Lassa fever have been seen in the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany, the Netherlands, Israel, Japan, and Canada[.10](#page-2-3)

Lassa virus affects people of all ages, races, and genders. However, the only confirmed reservoir of Lassa virus is *Mastomys natalensis,* a peridomestic rodent, and the disease is endemic to West Africa. Recently the disease was reported for the first time in Togo.[11,12](#page-2-4) Transmission is suspected to occur through direct contact with infected rodents or their secretions. Transmission is highly associated with poor housing, indiscriminate food storage, and catching of rodents.[4–7](#page-2-1) Person-to-person transmission occurs via direct contact with fluid or secretions from infected persons, including blood, urine, sputum, and seminal fluid on exposed cuts or abrasions or mucous membranes. Nosocomial transmission is usually due to injuries with needles and other sharp instruments, ill-advised surgery on infected patients, or exposure to bodily fluids.[1–4,9,13–15](#page-2-0)

# **NATURAL HISTORY, PATHOGENESIS, AND PATHOLOGY**

Fatal Lassa fever is directly associated with uncontrolled viral replication and severe intravascular events, including leaky capillary syndrome, pulmonary edema, and hypovolemic shock. In both humans and non-human primates, histologic lesions have been found among the fatally infected along with lymphadenopathy and, though relatively uncommon, splenomegaly. Additionally, microscopic findings have revealed substantial infiltration of mononuclear cells, mainly macrophages. In general, high titers of replicating virus in all organs are associated with fatality, whereas a rapid drop in viremia and viral clearance is correlated with survival. There is apparently suppressed cellular immune response in fatalities, whereas recovery from Lassa fever is associated with strong adaptive immune responses characterized by a high number of activated circulating monocytes and T cells, as well as Lassa virus–specific CD4<sup>+</sup> and CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells[.1–4,16–19](#page-2-0)

The critical events in fatal disease are intractable hypovolemic shock, convulsions, bleeding, and gross edema of the head and neck with pulmonary edema and respiratory distress. A recent report from an extensive study in Nigeria also pinpoints the presence of renal damage as an important risk for fatal disease. The heavy albuminuria may also be related to the extensive facial and neck edema noted in severe disease.[2,17,20](#page-2-5) Respiratory distress and/or convulsions with precipitous drop in body temperature and blood pressure indicate impending death. Some of these manifestations are due to disturbances in the intravascular compartment, particularly increased endothelial cell permeability. Although circulating platelet numbers are moderately well conserved (usually about 100,000 × 109 /L), platelet dysfunction correlates with severity of illness, and a marked decrease in prostacyclin production by endothelium has been measured in primates infected by Lassa virus. Disseminated intravascular coagulation is not a significant component of fatal Lassa fever; circulating platelet numbers are maintained, and in primates with severe Lassa infection, platelet and fibrinogen turnover have been normal with no increase in fibrinogen breakdown products in humans. No clear evidence of virus replication and microscopic damage to endothelium has been demonstrated, so it must be concluded that shock and bleeding are due to disturbances in the functional homeostatic mechanisms within the intravascular compartment, rather than simple activation of the coagulation cascade. An inhibitor of platelet function has been identified in the serum of patients and non-human primates with severe Lassa fever, suggesting that the underlying pathology in fatal infections is a disordered cytokine and chemokine response, as has been shown in Ebola and other fatal viral infections.[16,18,20,21](#page-2-6)

Lassa virus–specific immunoglobulin (Ig)M antibodies are detected 9 to 12 days post-infection. Glycoprotein (GP)1-, GP2-, and nucleoprotein-specific IgG antibodies are seen 12 to 16 days post-infection. However, antibody titers are not directly associated with viral clearance. Neutralizing antibodies are detected only long after recovery and do not appear to be associated with immunity to reinfection.

### **CLINICAL FEATURES**

Symptoms of Lassa fever include fever, sore throat, cough, vomiting, diarrhea, conjunctivitis, facial swelling, proteinuria, mucosal bleeding, and pain in the back, abdomen, and chest. Neurologic symptoms include loss of hearing, tremors, and encephalitis. After an incubation period of 7 to 18 days, Lassa fever begins insidiously with fever, weakness, and malaise. More than 50% of patients experience joint and lumbar pain, and 60% or more have a nonproductive cough. Most patients also have severe headache, usually frontal, and a painful sore throat. Many also develop severe retrosternal chest pain, and about half have vomiting or diarrhea and abdominal pain. On physical examination, respiratory rate, temperature, and pulse rate are elevated and blood pressure may be low. About a third have conjunctivitis and more than two-thirds have pharyngitis, half of whom have exudates with diffusely inflamed and swollen posterior pharynx and tonsils but with few, if any, petechiae[.2,17,20](#page-2-5)

Up to one-third of hospitalized patients progress to a prostrating illness 6 to 8 days after onset of fever. They are often dehydrated on admission with elevated hematocrit. Bleeding occurs in only 15% to 20% of patients, limited primarily to the mucosal surfaces or occasionally conjunctival hemorrhages or gastrointestinal or vaginal bleeding. In severe disease, edema of the face and neck carries a poor prognosis. In the absence of peripheral edema, this may indicate capillary leakage, rather than cardiac dysfunction or impaired venous return. Approximately half of all patients have diffuse abdominal tenderness, but there are no localizing signs and bowel sounds are usually active. On more than one occasion surgery has been performed, which is contraindicated. Proteinuria occurs in two-thirds of patients, and blood urea nitrogen levels may be moderately elevated. More recently studies in Nigeria have shown that renal damage is a high risk for death in a series of patients with Lassa fever.[20](#page-2-7)

Crepitation in the lungs and pleural and pericardial rubs develop usually in early convalescence in about 20% of patients, occasionally in association with congestive heart failure. Severe retrosternal or epigastric pain seen in many patients may be due to pleural or pericardial involvement. Most patients have abnormal electrocardiograms (ECGs), and changes include non-specific ST-segment and T-wave abnormalities, ST-segment elevation, generalized low-voltage complexes, and changes reflecting electrolyte disturbance.[22](#page--1-0) None of the abnormalities correlated with clinical severity of disease, serum aminotransferase levels, or eventual outcome. Central nervous system (CNS) signs are infrequent but also carry a poor prognosis, progressing from fine tremors and confusion to severe encephalopathy with or without generalized seizures but without focal signs.[23](#page--1-1) Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is usually normal, but there may be a few lymphocytes. Virus titers are lower in the CSF than in the serum[.24](#page--1-2) The most significant hematologic changes are in platelet function. Thrombocytopenia is moderate even in severely ill patients, and function is markedly depressed or even absent. This abnormality is usually maximal on admission to the hospital, and is characteristically present even when circulating platelet numbers remain normal. A circulating inhibitor of platelet function has been associated with severe disease; it specifically inhibits platelet-dense granule and adenosine triphosphate release, relatively sparing the thromboxane pathways.[17,25](#page-2-8) The mean white blood cell (WBC) count in Lassa fever on admission to hospital is 6000/mm3 and there is characteristically early lymphopenia, relative thrombocytopenia, and sometimes a relative or absolute neutrophilia. Neutrophil counts as high as 30,000/mm3 have been recorded in severe disease. The inhibitor activity of platelet function is also associated with poor generation of the chemotactic peptide *N*-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (FMLP)–induced superoxide generation in neutrophils. These observations are consistent with disordered innate immune response and inappropriate cytokine and chemokine secretions, as described earlier[.21,25,26](#page--1-3)

Serum aminotransferase levels >150 IU/L on admission are associated with a case fatality rate of 50%. The level of viremia (blood virus level >1 × 103 mL, median tissue culture infective dose [TCID50] per milliliter) is also associated with increased case fatality. The synergistic effect of both factors is a mortality risk of 80%. Other indicators of poor prognosis include shock, bleeding, neurologic manifestations, thrombocytopenia, lymphopenia, and leukocytosis with neutrophilia, and renal failure[.17,20,21](#page-2-8)

Lassa fever is a common cause of maternal mortality in many areas of West Africa. In Sierra Leone, Lassa virus accounts for 25% of all maternal deaths. Case fatality rates in pregnancy are as high as 40%, with the worst prognosis occurring in the third trimester. This is true even for women who receive adequate obstetric care. Prognosis for the mother improves with uterine evacuation at any stage of gestation; the highest case fatality rates occur in women with a fetus in utero*.* Spontaneous abortion occurs in 80% of women who are infected with Lassa virus during the first or second trimester of pregnancy. Stillbirth and neonatal death occur in 75% of maternal cases in the third trimester[.27,28](#page--1-4) Virus titers in the placenta are as high as 109 TCID50/mL. Virus is also shed in milk from infected mothers and is believed to be transmitted through breastfeeding. [24,28](#page--1-2)

Up to 30% of patients with Lassa fever experience an acute loss of hearing in one or both ears; in two-thirds of these patients, the loss is permanent. Unlike other viral infections that are known to cause hearing loss during the acute stage of infection, hearing loss associated with Lassa virus often occurs during the convalescent stage of infection; additional hearing loss may develop over time, even after full recovery. It is believed that viremia is not responsible for hearing loss in patients, but rather, immune-mediated injury. This hypothesis is supported by the fact that early administration of ribavirin has little effect on hearing outcomes[.29,30](#page--1-5)

# **PATIENT EVALUATION, DIAGNOSIS, AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS**

All persons performing procedures must wear adequate personal protective equipment (e.g., gloves, mask, and gown). Additionally, freshly made disinfectant (e.g., 10% hypochlorite) must be on site for immediate disinfection of contaminated materials. Particular care must be taken with all sharp instruments. Specimens should be drawn into a vacuum tube system, if available, to minimize risk of spills. Urine should be mixed with an equal amount of bovine serum albumin at pH 7.4 before freezing. Other fluids should be frozen undiluted. All of these specimens keep best if they are frozen at −70°C or in liquid nitrogen as soon as possible.[21,24](#page--1-3)

Lassa fever may be difficult to diagnose clinically because its manifestations, especially in the early days of illness, are not specific and easily confused with early manifestations of many common infections (e.g., malaria, arbovirus infections, and typhoid fever). In young babies, marked edema has been reported. In older children, the disease may manifest as diarrhea, pneumonia, or an unexplained prolonged fever[.31,32](#page--1-6) Among adults in an endemic area, fever with pharyngitis, proteinuria, and retrosternal chest pain has a positive predictive value for Lassa fever of 81% and a specificity of 89%. However, this triad's diagnostic sensitivity is only 50%. Bleeding and sore throat have a sensitivity and specificity for fatal outcome of about 90%. The case fatality of infections with renal damage is 60%[.20](#page-2-7)

The standard field method for the laboratory diagnosis over many years was detection of virus-specific antibody by indirect fluorescent antibody (IFA). Generally, an IgG titer of at least 16 and an IgM titer of 4 are considered specific for Lassa infection. At least 50% of Lassa fever patients have measurable IgG or IgM IFA antibodies by day 5 of illness, and virtually all have antibodies by days 12 to 14. The IgG antibodies are directed against the glycoprotein and nucleocapsid of Lassa virus; they are often present simultaneously with high levels of viremia and during the most severe stage of illness. In more recent years, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) has replaced IFA to detect IgG and/or IgM antibodies using either recombinant antigens or tissue culture, or reverse ELISA where amount of antibody can be measured using a directly labeled antigen or by a labeled monoclonal antibody.[33–35](#page--1-7) Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) techniques detecting fragments of the S gene of the virus coding for the glycoprotein are now used in many situations but may be a challenge in poorer rural areas where Lassa fever tends to occur in West Africa. This technique is rapid, accurate, and sensitive. RNA extraction techniques effectively inactivate the virus, so the procedure carries minimal laboratory hazards[.35–38](#page--1-8)

Lassa virus isolation requires laboratory biosafety level 4 (BSL4) facilities. The virus may easily be isolated in cell culture (the E6 clone of vero cells) or suckling mice. It has also been isolated from throat swabs during acute illness, breast milk, spinal fluid, pleural and pericardial transudate, and autopsy material. Virus may be recovered for 1 to 2 months in urine during convalescence, albeit at low titer. Virus has now been isolated from semen in a few instances, raising the possibility of sexual transmission if virus persists. The virus may be inactivated for safe laboratory manipulation for antibody studies by using heat (56°C for 30 minutes), β-propiolactone, formalin, and ultraviolet radiation. Antigenic properties are best conserved by inactivation with gamma irradiation. Disinfection can be accomplished by washing with 0.5% phenol in detergent (e.g., Lysol), 10% hypochlorite solution, formaldehyde, or peracetic acid[.24,39](#page--1-2)

### **TREATMENT**

Ribavirin, a guanosine analog, has been successfully used in humans to treat acute Lassa fever. When administered within the first 6 days of illness, ribavirin decreases the case fatality rate from 55% in the highest-risk group to 5%. A smaller but still significant decrease in fatality has also been demonstrated in patients treated later in illness. Patients treated with ribavirin undergo a significant reduction in viremia, regardless of outcome. The drug is most successful when given intravenously as a 2-g loading dose, followed by 1 g every 6 hours for 4 days, and then 0.5 g every 8 hours for 6 more days. There is some evidence that oral ribavirin may also be effective, particularly when given early in milder cases, as well as prophylactically.[40–43](#page--1-9) Alternatives to ribavirin are currently under investigation, and favipiravir has now been successfully used in a few situations along with ribavirin.[40](#page--1-9)

Fluid, electrolyte, respiratory, and osmotic imbalances should be corrected to prevent clinical shock. However, even vigorous support of this kind may be insufficient to prevent fatal progression of advanced disease when anti-viral treatment is started late in infection. Furthermore, the tendency of patients to develop pulmonary edema may be exacerbated by injudicious fluid replacement.

Lassa vaccine strategies have evolved from killed to live vaccines. The early killed vaccines invoked good humoral response to Lassa virus proteins but failed to protect Lassa virus–challenged nonhuman primates. Focus then shifted to activating cellular response. A comprehensive study involving 44 non-human primates evaluated the efficacy of recombinant vaccinia viruses expressing Lassa virus proteins. The vaccine was highly successful in protecting against lethal disease; however, the vaccinia platform was found unsuitable for human use due to potential side effects, especially among immunosuppressed individuals. The safety profile of another recombinant vaccine, vesicular stomatitis virus expressing the complete Lassa virus GPC, has yet to be sufficiently explored. The most viable strategy appears to be a reassortment vaccine, ML29, which encodes the NP and GPC of Lassa virus and the Z and L proteins from the Mopeia virus (a non-pathogenic arenavirus). ML29 successfully protected mice, guinea pigs, and small non-human primates challenged with Lassa virus. Further safety studies must be undertaken to examine the potential dangers of natural reassortment in this vaccine. However, similar to the situation with Ebola vaccine, a Lassa vaccine for humans has not been developed or tested even in phase I trials, despite the obvious need for such a vaccine.[40,43–55](#page--1-9)

#### REFERENCES

- <span id="page-2-0"></span>1. McCormick JB. Epidemiology and control of Lassa fever. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1987;134:69–78.
- <span id="page-2-5"></span>2. McCormick JB, King IJ, Webb PA, et al. A case-control study of the clinical diagnosis and course of Lassa fever. J Infect Dis 1987;155(3):445–55.
- 3. McCormick JB, Webb PA, Krebs JW, et al. A prospective study of the epidemiology and ecology of Lassa fever. J Infect Dis 1987;155(3):437–44.
- <span id="page-2-1"></span>4. McCormick JB, Fisher-Hoch SP. Lassa fever. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 2002;262:75–109.
- 5. Keenlyside RA, McCormick JB, Webb PA, et al. Case-control study of Mastomys natalensis and humans in Lassa virus-infected households in Sierra Leone. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1983;32(4):829–37.
- 6. Bonwitt J, Saez AM, Lamin J, et al. At home with Mastomys and Rattus: human-rodent interactions and potential for primary transmission of Lassa virus in domestic spaces. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2017;96(4):935–43.
- 7. Marien J, Kourouma F, Magassouba N, et al. Movement patterns of small rodents in Lassa fever-endemic villages in Guinea. Ecohealth 2018.
- <span id="page-2-2"></span>8. World Health Organization. Lassa fever – Nigeria. [https://www.who.int/](https://www.who.int/csr/don/20-april-2018-lassa-fever-nigeria/en/) [csr/don/20-april-2018-lassa-fever-nigeria/en/.](https://www.who.int/csr/don/20-april-2018-lassa-fever-nigeria/en/)
- 9. Roberts L. Nigeria hit by unprecedented Lassa fever outbreak. Science 2018;359(6381):1201–2.
- <span id="page-2-3"></span>10. Macher AM, Wolfe MS. Historical Lassa fever reports and 30-year clinical update. Emerg Infect Dis 2006;12(5):835–7.
- <span id="page-2-4"></span>11. Safronetz D, Sogoba N, Diawara SI, et al. Annual incidence of Lassa virus infection in Southern Mali. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2017;96(4):944–6.
- 12. Patassi AA, Landoh DE, Mebiny-Essoh Tchalla A, et al. Emergence of Lassa fever disease in northern Togo: report of two cases in Oti district in 2016. Case Rep Infect Dis 2017;2017:8242313.
- 13. Grahn A, Brave A, Tolfvenstam T, Studahl M. Absence of nosocomial transmission of imported Lassa fever during use of standard barrier nursing methods. Emerg Infect Dis 2018;24(6):978–87.
- 14. Fisher-Hoch SP, Tomori O, Nasidi A, et al. Review of cases of nosocomial Lassa fever in Nigeria: the high price of poor medical practice. BMJ 1995;311(7009):857–9.
- 15. Fisher-Hoch SP, Price ME, Craven RB, et al. Safe intensive-care management of a severe case of Lassa fever with simple barrier nursing techniques. Lancet 1985;2(8466):1227–9.
- <span id="page-2-6"></span>16. Baize S, Marianneau P, Loth P, et al. Early and strong immune responses are associated with control of viral replication and recovery in Lassa virus-infected cynomolgus monkeys. J Virol 2009;83(11):5890–903.
- <span id="page-2-8"></span>17. Fisher-Hoch SP, McCormick JB. Pathophysiology and treatment of Lassa fever. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1987;134:231–9.
- 18. Khan SH, Goba A, Chu M, et al. New opportunities for field research on the pathogenesis and treatment of Lassa fever. Antiviral Res 2008;78(1):103–15.
- 19. Russier M, Reynard S, Tordo N, Baize S. NK cells are strongly activated by Lassa and Mopeia virus-infected human macrophages in vitro but do not mediate virus suppression. Eur J Immunol 2012;42(7):1822–32.
- <span id="page-2-7"></span>20. Okokhere P, Colubri A, Azubike C, et al. Clinical and laboratory predictors of Lassa fever outcome in a dedicated treatment facility in Nigeria: a retrospective, observational cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis 2018;18(6):684–95.